Source: https://cloud.google.com/agent-builder/overview
Downloaded: 2026-02-22

Home
Documentation
AI and ML
Vertex AI Agent Builder
Guides
Send feedback
Vertex AI Agent Builder overview
Stay organized with collections
Save and categorize content based on your preferences.
Vertex AI Agent Builder is a suite of products that help developers
build, scale, and govern AI agents in production.
Vertex AI Agent Builder provides a full-stack, secure foundation that
supports the entire agent lifecycle:
Build
: Build agents using frameworks such as Agent Development Kit (ADK)
or any other open-source framework of your choice.
Agent Development Kit (ADK)
is an
open-source framework that simplifies the process of building sophisticated
multi-agent systems while maintaining precise control over agent behavior.
Agent Garden
(Supported in
preview
) is a library in the Google Cloud console where you can find
and explore sample agents and tools that are designed to accelerate your
development. In the Agent Garden, you can find the following:
Agents
: These are prebuilt, end-to-end solutions for specific use
cases. For example, you might find an agent designed for customer
service, data analysis, or creative writing. These agents are ready to
be used and can be customized to fit your needs. Only Google
can publish agents to the Agent Garden. To use an agent from the
garden, you can select it and deploy it to your project.
Tools
: These are individual components that you can add to your own
agents. Tools provide specific functionalities, like interacting with a
database, calling an external API, or performing a search. You can
browse the available tools in the Agent Garden and integrate them into
your agents built with the Agent Development Kit (ADK). This lets you
extend your agent's capabilities without having to build these
functionalities from scratch.
Go to Agent Garden
Agent Designer
(
Preview
) is a
low-code visual designer that lets you design and test your agent.
Experiment with your agent in Agent Designer before transitioning
development to code using
Agent Development Kit
.
Go to Agent Designer
Scale
: Scale your agents into production with built-in testing, release
management, and reliability at a global and secure scale.
Vertex AI Agent Engine
is a set of services that enables developers to deploy, manage, and
scale AI agents in production. Vertex AI Agent Engine
offers services such as a fully-managed runtime, evaluation, Sessions,
Memory Bank, and Code Execution. Understand agent behavior with
Google
Cloud Trace
(supporting
OpenTelemetry
),
Cloud Monitoring
, and
Cloud Logging
.
Agent Tools
are tools that you can equip your ADK agent to use, including:
Built-in tools
such as
Grounding with Google Search
,
Vertex AI Search
, and
Code Execution
RAG Engine
for retrieval-augmented generation (RAG)
Google Cloud tools
to connect to:
Your APIs managed in
Apigee API Hub
100+ enterprise applications through
Integration Connectors
Custom integrations with
Application Integration
Model Context Protocol (MCP) tools
Ecosystem tools
such as LangChain tools, CrewAI tools, and
GenAI Toolbox for Databases
Govern
: Monitor what your agents are doing with an audit trail for
end-to-end observability.
Detect threats with Security Command Center
:
Agent Engine Threat
Detection
(Preview) is a built-in service of Security Command Center that helps you detect and
investigate potential attacks on agents that are deployed to
Vertex AI Agent Engine Runtime.
Agent identity
(Preview):
Use
Identity Access Management (IAM)
agent identity to provide security and access management features when using agents on Vertex AI Agent Engine Runtime.
Tools in the
Cloud API Registry
(Preview): Use
Cloud API Registry in the Google Cloud console to view and manage the MCP servers
and tools your agent has access to.
The following diagram shows the components of Vertex AI Agent Builder:
To learn more about AI agents in general, see the following:
Blog post on
multi-agent systems with Vertex AI
What are AI Agents?
Vertex AI Agent Builder
Workflow for building and deploying agents
Discover agent samples and tools specific to your use cases in the
Agent Garden
.
Build and test your agent using the Agent Development Kit.
Deploy your agent to Vertex AI Agent Engine.
What's next
Agent Development Kit overview
Send feedback