Source: https://cloud.google.com/vertex-ai/docs/training/hyperparameter-tuning-overview
Downloaded: 2026-02-22

Home
Documentation
AI and ML
Vertex AI
Send feedback
Overview of hyperparameter tuning
Stay organized with collections
Save and categorize content based on your preferences.
Hyperparameter tuning
takes advantage of the processing infrastructure of Google Cloud to test
different hyperparameter configurations when training your model. It can give
you optimized values for hyperparameters, which maximizes your model's
predictive accuracy.
What's a hyperparameter?
Hyperparameters contain the data that govern the training process itself.
Your training application handles three categories of data as it trains your
model:
Your
input data
(also called training data) is a collection of individual
records (instances) containing the features important to your machine
learning problem. This data is used during training to configure your model
to accurately make inferences about new instances of similar data. However,
the values in your input data never directly become part of your model.
Your model's
parameters
are the variables that your chosen machine
learning technique uses to adjust to your data. For example, a deep neural
network (DNN) is composed of processing nodes (neurons), each with an
operation performed on data as it travels through the network. When your DNN
is trained, each node has a weight value that tells your model how much
impact it has on the final inference. Those weights are an example of your
model's parameters. In many ways, your model's parameters
are
the
model—they are what distinguishes your particular model from other
models of the same type working on similar data.
Your
hyperparameters
are the variables that govern the training process
itself. For example, part of designing a DNN is deciding how many hidden
layers of nodes to use between the input and output layers, and how many
nodes each hidden layer should use. These variables are not directly
related to the training data. They are configuration variables. Note that
parameters change during a training job, while hyperparameters are usually
constant during a job.
Your model
parameters
are optimized (you could say "tuned") by the training
process: you run data through the operations of the model, compare the resulting
inference with the actual value for each data instance, evaluate the accuracy,
and adjust until you find the best values.
Hyperparameters
are tuned by
running your whole training job, looking at the aggregate accuracy, and
adjusting. In both cases, you are modifying the composition of your model
to find the best combination to handle your problem.
Without an automated technology like Vertex AI hyperparameter
tuning, you need to make manual adjustments to the hyperparameters over the
course of many training runs to arrive at the optimal values. Hyperparameter
tuning makes the process of determining the best hyperparameter settings easier
and less tedious.
How hyperparameter tuning works
Hyperparameter tuning works by running multiple
trials
of your training
application with values for your chosen hyperparameters, set within limits you
specify. Vertex AI keeps track of the results of each
trial and makes adjustments for subsequent trials. When the job is finished, you
can get a summary of all the trials along with the most effective configuration
of values according to the criteria you specify.
Hyperparameter tuning requires explicit communication between the
Vertex AI and your training application. Your
training application defines all the information that your model needs.
You define the hyperparameters (variables) that you want to adjust, and
target variables that are used to evaluate each trial.
Learn more about Bayesian optimization for hyperparameter
tuning
.
In addition to Bayesian optimization, Vertex AI optimizes
across hyperparameter tuning jobs. If you are doing hyperparameter tuning
against similar models, changing only the objective function or adding
a new input column, Vertex AI is able to improve over time and
make the hyperparameter tuning more efficient.
What hyperparameter tuning optimizes
Hyperparameter tuning optimizes target variables that you specify, called
hyperparameter metrics. Model accuracy, as calculated from an evaluation pass,
is a common metric. Metrics must be numeric.
When configuring a hyperparameter tuning job, you define the name and goal of
each metric. The goal specifies whether you want to tune your model to maximize
or minimize the value of this metric.
How Vertex AI gets your metrics
Use the
cloudml-hypertune
Python package
to pass
metrics to Vertex AI. This library provides helper functions for
reporting metrics to Vertex AI.
Learn more about reporting hyperparameter metrics
.
The flow of hyperparameter values
Without hyperparameter tuning, you can set your hyperparameters by whatever
means you like in your training application. For example, you can configure the
hyperparameters by passing command-line arguments to your main application
module, or feed them to your application in a configuration file.
When you use hyperparameter tuning, you must use the following procedure to set
the values of the hyperparameters that you're using for tuning:
Define a command-line argument in your main training module for each tuned
hyperparameter.
Use the value passed in those arguments to set the corresponding
hyperparameter in your application's code.
When you configure a hyperparameter tuning job, you define each
hyperparameter to tune, its data type, and the range of values to try. You
identify each hyperparameter using the same name as the corresponding argument
you defined in your main module. The training service includes command-line
arguments using these names when it runs your application.
Learn more about the requirements for parsing command-line
arguments
.
Select hyperparameters to tune
There is little universal advice to give about how to choose
which hyperparameters you should tune. If you have experience with the machine
learning technique that you're using, you may have insight into how its
hyperparameters behave. You may also be able to find advice from machine
learning communities.
However you choose them, it's important to understand the implications. Every
hyperparameter that you choose to tune has the potential to
increase the number of trials required for a successful tuning job. When you
run a hyperparameter tuning job on Vertex AI,
the amount you're
charged is based on the duration of the trials initiated by your hyperparameter
tuning job
. A careful choice of hyperparameters to tune can reduce
the time and cost of your hyperparameter tuning job.
Hyperparameter data types
In a
ParameterSpec
object, you specify the hyperparameter
data type as an instance of a parameter value specification. The following
table lists the supported parameter value specifications.
Type
Data type
Value ranges
Value data
DoubleValueSpec
DOUBLE
minValue
&
maxValue
Floating-point values
IntegerValueSpec
INTEGER
minValue
&
maxValue
Integer values
CategoricalValueSpec
CATEGORICAL
categoricalValues
List of category strings
DiscreteValueSpec
DISCRETE
discreteValues
List of values in ascending order
Scale hyperparameters
In a
ParameterSpec
object, you can specify that scaling
should be performed on this hyperparameter. Scaling is recommended for the
DOUBLE and INTEGER data types. The available
scaling types
are:
SCALE_TYPE_UNSPECIFIED
: No scaling is applied to this hyperparameter.
UNIT_LINEAR_SCALE
: Scales the feasible space linearly 0 through 1.
UNIT_LOG_SCALE
: Scales the feasible space logarithmically 0 through 1.
The entire feasible space must be strictly positive.
UNIT_REVERSE_LOG_SCALE
: Scales the feasible space "reverse" logarithmically
0 through 1. The result is that values close to the top of the feasible
space are spread out more than points near the bottom. The entire feasible
space must be strictly positive.
Conditional hyperparameters
The
ConditionalParameterSpec
object lets you add
hyperparameters to a trial when the value of its parent hyperparameter matches a
condition that you specify.
For example, you could define a hyperparameter tuning job with the goal of
finding an optimal model using either linear regression or a deep neural
network (DNN). To let your tuning job specify the training method, you define
a categorical hyperparameter named
training_method
with the following options:
LINEAR_REGRESSION
and
DNN
. When the
training_method
is
LINEAR_REGRESSION
, your tuning job must specify a hyperparameter for the
learning rate
. When the
training_method
is
DNN
, your tuning job
must specify parameters for the
learning rate
and the
number of hidden layers
.
Since the number of hidden layers is applicable only when a trial's
training_method
is
DNN
, you define a conditional parameter that adds
a hyperparameter named
num_hidden_layers
when the
training_method
is
DNN
.
Since the learning rate is used by both
training_method
options, you must
decide if this conditional hyperparameter should be shared. If the
hyperparameter is shared, the tuning job uses what it has learned from
LINEAR_REGRESSION
and
DNN
trials to tune the learning rate. In this case,
it makes more sense to have separate learning rates for each
training_method
,
since the learning rate for training a model using
LINEAR_REGRESSION
shouldn't
affect the learning rate for training a model using
DNN
. So, you define the
following conditional hyperparameters:
A hyperparameter named
learning_rate
that is added when the
training_method
is
LINEAR_REGRESSION
.
A hyperparameter named
learning_rate
that is added when the
training_method
is
DNN
.
Conditional hyperparameters let you define the hyperparameters for your tuning
job as a graph. This lets you tune your training process using different
training techniques, each with their own hyperparameter dependencies.
Search algorithms
You can specify a search algorithm in the
StudySpec
object.
If you don't specify an algorithm, your job uses the default
Vertex AI algorithm. The default algorithm applies Bayesian
optimization to arrive at the optimal solution with a more effective search
over the parameter space.
Available values:
ALGORITHM_UNSPECIFIED
: Same as not specifying an algorithm.
Vertex AI chooses the best search algorithm between Gaussian
process bandits, linear combination search, or their variants.
GRID_SEARCH
: A grid search within the feasible space. This option is
particularly useful if you want to specify a quantity of trials that is
greater than the number of points in the feasible space. In such cases, if
you don't specify a grid search, the Vertex AI default
algorithm may generate duplicate suggestions. To use grid search, all
parameters must be of type
INTEGER
,
CATEGORICAL
, or
DISCRETE
.
RANDOM_SEARCH
: A random search within the feasible space.
What's next
Learn how to
implement hyperparameter tuning for your training
jobs
Read a blog post about
Bayesian optimization and hyperparameter
tuning
.
Send feedback